##Objectives
create a MySQL DB instance with Amazon RDS and connect to it.

What will you accomplish?
In this demo project, you will:

Create a MySQL DB instance with AWS RDS

Create an EC2 instance

Connect the EC2 instance to the DB instance automatically

Connect to the MySQL DB instance 

Delete the DB instance and EC2 instance

Step 1: Create a MySQL database instance
Login to your AWS management console, click on Services on the menu bar, select database in the left navigation pane and choose RDS to open Amazon RDS.


From the dashboard page, scroll down to create database section, then click on Create database


As the creation method, choose Easy create and MySQL icon as Engine type.


 

Select the Free Tier template.


Now let’s configure our database settings as shown below:

DB instance identifier: mysqldb-demo

Master username: admin (leave the auto generate password box unchecked)

Master password: school123

Confirm master password: school123


Open View default settings for Easy create and note the VPC value. 


Click on Create database to create a new database with the previous settings.

The creation process takes some minutes to be done. Then you can see the database status is Available


Step 2: Create an EC2 instance
In this section, we will create an Amazon EC2 instance with:

The name: ec2-mysqldb-connect

AMI machine: Amazon Linux 

Instance type: t2.micro

Create a new key pair: db-connect-key

And attach the same VPC as for the DB instance (default VPC  in my case). This will help in the next step to connect the EC2 instance to the database.

Finally, the EC2 instance has been created successfully.


Step 3: Connect the EC2 instance to the DB instance automatically
To connect an EC2 instance and the DB instance automatically, follow the instructions below:

Go to Amazon RDS service

Click on Databases in the left panel.

Choose mysqldb-demo database and click on Actions, then choose Set up EC2 connection


In the Set up EC2 connection, choose the EC2 instance we created ( ec2-mysqldb-connect) and click on Continue.


Then Click on Confirm and set up in the Review and confirm page. You will get a notification as in the following image.


Step 4: Connect to the MySQL DB instance
Once the connection is established between DB instance and EC2 instance, you can connect the the DB instance. To connect to the MySQL DB instance, follow the steps below:

Go to Amazon RDS service

Click on Databases in the left panel.

Click on mysqldb-demo database.

On the Connectivity & security tab, copy the endpoint and the port number


Note: Make sure port 22 is open in the inbound rule of the server to allow access via ssh.

Connect to the EC2 instance in ssh:

Go to EC2 service

Click on Instances in the left panel, then click on the instance Id of ec2-mysqldb-connect.

Click on Connect button

Click in the SSH client tab, then copy the chmod and ssh commands in the example.


Open your git bash terminal and paste the command below (replace chmod and ssh commands with those you copied before)



cd ~/Downloads
chmod 400 db-connect-key.pem
ssh -i "db-connect-key.pem" ec2-user@ec2-44-202-0-20.compute-1.amazonaws.com
Now, install the mysql command-line client from MariaDB with the commands below:



sudo yum update -y
sudo yum install mariadb105-server -y
To connect to the MySQL DB instance, use the change the endpoint in the below command and run it.



mysql -h mysqldb-demo.c2qyimycqlj9.us-east-1.rds.amazonaws.com -P 3306 -u admin -p
Then enter the password: school123


Run this SQL command in MySQL prompt to get the current date and time:



SELECT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP;

Step 5: Delete the DB instance and EC2 instance
Finally, we have done the objective of this demo project. We have to delete all instances created for the project the avoid extra charges.

Delete the EC2 instance
To delete the EC2 instance, follow the instructions below:

Connect to the AWS EC2 service

Click on Instances in the left panel, then choose ec2-mysqldb-connect

Click on Instance state, choose Terminate instance, then Click on Terminate


Delete the MySQL DB instance
To delete the MySQL DB instance, follow the steps below:

Go to Amazon RDS service.

Click on Databases in the left panel.

Click on mysqldb-demo database.

Click on Actions, choose Delete 


Check Create final snapshot box and uncheck Retain automated backups box, then type delete me in the field and click the Delete button.


The deletion process takes some time to be done.
